Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Also, remember to sign up via the link in
the description to get all of the lab files
for this course, so you can try it out yourself
in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for
the CCNA, click the link in the video description
to check it out.
It’s a network simulator like packet tracer,
but it’s even better, and it includes all
of these guided labs to not only help you
get hands-on practice configuring and troubleshooting,
but also deepen your understanding of the
exam topics.
I used it myself when studying for my certifications,
so I feel confident about recommending it
to all of you.
Watch until the end of this video, we’ll
take a look at a lab from NetSim.
If you want to get your own copy of NetSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
In this lab we will configure EtherChannel
between switches in this network.
All of the connections between these switches
have redundant links.
However, because of spanning tree protocol
only one link will be active at a time.
The inactive link will act as a backup, which
is good, but we would prefer if both could
be forwarding at the same time, to increase
the potential bandwidth for the connections.
We will configure Layer 2 etherchannels between
the access layer switches and the distribution
layer switches, and then we will configure
a Layer 3 etherchannel between the distribution
layer switches.
Let’s get started with step 1.
I’ll go on ASW1 first.
ENABLE.
And frst let’s check the spanning-tree situation.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
So, G0/1, connec ted to DSW1, is the root
port, however G0/2 is an alternate port.
It won’t forward or receive any frames,
so it’s just acting as a backup.
If we configure this connection with DSW1
as an EtherChannel, we shouldn’t see these
two interfaces here, they will be replaced
with the port-channel interface, which should
be the new root port, and will forward traffic
using both physical interfaces.
So, let’s do that.
Enter global config mode.
CONF T. Let’s configure both interfaces
together.
INTERFACE RANGE G0/1 to 2.
To configure etherchannel, use the channel-group
command.
CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE, now which options do
we have?
Step 1 instructs us to use LACP, so we can
use active or passive modes.
If we use passive mode, we have to ensure
that DSW1’s side is in active mode, or the
EtherChannel won’t form.
But let’s just go with active on both sides.
ACTIVE.
Okay, we’re also instructed to configure it as
a trunk.
To do so, let’s configure the port-channel
interface that was created.
INTERFACE PO1.
SWITCHPORT MODE TRUNK.
Okay, so because DSW1’s port-channel isn’t
configured yet we won’t see this trunk in
SHOW INTERFACES TRUNK, but let’s just check
the running-config to confirm.
DO SHOW RUN.
So, you can see that the port-channel 1 interface
was created, and if we scroll down to G0/1
and G0/2, you can see that the SWITCHPORT
MODE TRUNK command we applied to the port-channel
was also applied to them.
Let’s also check the status of the EtherChannel,
you’ll see one of the status flags I didn’t
show in the lecture video.
DO SHOW ETHERCHANNEL SUMMARY.
So, the port-channel interface itself is SD,
meaning Layer 2 and Down.
Now look at the member ports.
They have the flag ‘I’.
What does that mean?
It means stand-alone.
So, they are configured to be part of an etherchannel,
but because of some problem they are acting
as stand-alone, individual ports.
Why is that?
It’s because we haven’t configured DSW1
yet.
So, next up let’s configure DSW1’s side.
ENABLE.
CONF T. The configuration will be the same
as on ASW1.
INTERFACE RANGE G1/0/3 to 4.
CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE ACTIVE.
Passive would work as well here, since ASW1’s
side is configured as active.
Now let’s configure the port-channel as
a trunk.
INTERFACE PO1.
SWITCHPORT MODE TRUNK.
As you can see, this model of switch supports
both ISL and dot1q trunk encapsulations, so
we have to set the encapsulation first.
SWITCHPORT TRUNK ENCAPSULATION DOT1Q.
SWITCHPORT MODE TRUNK.
Okay, now the EtherChannel should be up.
Let’s check.
DO SHOW ETHERCHANNEL SUMMARY.
The port-channel interface has the flags SU,
meaning Layer 2 and in use.
These are the flags we want to see.
For the member ports, the flag is P, meaning
bundled in the port-channel.
This is also what we want to see.
Let’s check the trunk interfaces.
DO SHOW INTERFACE TRUNK.
Okay, port-channel 1 properly became a trunk.
Before configuring the next EtherChannel,
I’ll go back to ASW1 to see if the output
of SHOW SPANNING-TREE is different.
DO SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
As I said, we no longer see G0/1 and G0/2
in the output, just Port-channel 1 which is the root
port.
F0/1 and 2 are designated because they are
connected to end hosts.
Next up is the EtherChannel between ASW2 and
DSW2.
The configurations will be almost identical
to the ones we just did, except instead of
active mode we’ll use desirable, which is
the PAgP equivalent.
Remember, PAgP has desirable and auto modes,
whereas LACP has active and passive.
So I’ll quickly run through the configurations,
first on ASW2.
ENABLE.
CONF T. INTERFACE RANGE G0/1 to 2.
CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE, now here is the only
difference.
DESIRABLE.
So, the port-channel interface was created, now let’s
configure it.
INTERFACE PO1.
SWITCHPORT MODE TRUNK.
That’s ASW2’s side, next up DSW2.
ENABLE.
CONF T. INTERFACE RANGE G1/0/3 to 4.
CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE DESIRABLE.
Next up, make the port-channel a trunk.
INTERFACE PO1.
This is the same model of switch as DSW1,
so we have to set the encapsulation.
SWITCHPORT TRUNK ENCAPSULATION DOT1Q.
SWITCHPORT MODE TRUNK.
Okay, let’s check if it’s up.
DO SHOW ETHERCHANNEL SUMMARY.
Here are the flags we want to see, SU for
the port-channel, and P for the member interfaces.
Next up let’s configure the Layer 3 port-channel
connecting DSW1 and DSW2.
We’re already on DSW2, so let’s start
here.
INTERFACE RANGE G1/0/1 to 2.
So, first you should make these routed ports
with the command NO SWITCHPORT.
Now when you make the channel-group, the port-channel
interface will automatically be Layer 3.
We already used channel-group 1 for the connections
to the access switches, so let’s use channel-group
2.
CHANNEL-GROUP 2 MODE ON.
I used ON, because the instructions say to
use static etherchannel.
Now all we have to do is configure an IP address
on the port-channel.
INTERFACE PO2.
IP ADDRESS 10.0.0.2 255.255.255.252.
Okay, that’s it.
Let’s do the same on DSW1.
INTERFACE RANGE G1/0/1 to 2.
NO SWITCHPORT.
CHANNEL-GROUP 2 MODE ON.
INTERFACE PO2.
IP ADDRESS 10.0.0.1 255.255.255.252.
Okay let’s take a look at the status.
DO SHOW ETHERCHANNEL SUMMARY.
Notice that the flags are now RU, meaning
Layer 3 and in use, and the member interfaces
once again display P, which is what we want
to see.
Let’s try a ping to DSW2’s port-channel
interface.
DO PING 10.0.0.2.
Okay, looks good.
Next up we are supposed to configure static
routes so the PCs can reach SRV1.
So, let’s check the current routing table.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
There is no routing table, why is that?
Well, for a multilayer switch to build a routing
table, we need to enable IP routing.
DSW1 was able to ping DSW2 because it’s
directly connected, but if we don’t enable
ip routing, even if we configure static routes,
the switches still won’t build a routing
table.
So let’s enable IP routing and configure
the route here on DSW1.
EXIT.
IP ROUTING.
Now let’s check the table.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
So, these routes we already have for the VLAN1
SVI, which I preconfigured, and the port-channel
2 interface we just configured.
Let’s configure a static route to SRV1’s
subnet.
IP ROUTE 172.16.2.0 255.255.255.0, and the
next hop is 10.0.0.2.
Let’s check DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
Okay, it was added to the table.
Next I’ll do the same on DSW2.
EXIT.
IP ROUTING.
And I’ll configure a route to the PCs’
subnet.
IP ROUTE 172.16.1.0 255.255.255.0, and the
next hop is 10.0.0.1.
Let’s check the table.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
Okay, looks like we have all of the routes
we need.
So, let’s try a ping from PC1 to SRV1.
PC1’s default gateway is the SVI on DSW1,
and then DSW1 will route it over its Layer
3 port-channel to DSW2, which will forward
it to SRV1.
So, let’s try the ping.
PING 172.16.2.1.
So, I’ve said this a few times before, but
when you first ping you’ll probably have
a few timeouts, this is because the ARP process
needs to complete, but after that they should
all go through, like this.
Okay next up we are asked to check the default
EtherChannel load-balancing method used on
each switch.
The access switches are the same model, and
the distribution switches are both the same
model too, so I’ll just check ASW1 and DSW1.
ASW1 first.  To check the load-balancing method,
use this command.
DO SHOW ETHERCHANNEL LOAD-BALANCE.
So, the default is source MAC address.
All frames from the same source MAC address
will always use the same member interface
of the EtherChannel.
While we’re on ASW1, I’ll do step 6 as
well, which is to set this to source and destination
IP address.
EXIT.
Okay, the show command uses ‘etherchannel’,
but to configure the load-balancing method
we use this command: PORT-CHANNEL LOAD-BALANCE
SRC-DST-IP.
Let’s check again.
DO SHOW ETHERCHANNEL LOAD-BALANCE.
Okay, it has been changed.
I’ll go on ASW2 and do the same now.  EXIT.
PORT-CHANNEL LOAD-BALANCE SRC-DST-IP.
And let’s confirm.
DO SHOW ETHERCHANNEL LOAD-BALANCE.
Okay, looks good.
Finally let’s check the load-balancing method
on DSW1.
DO SHOW ETHERCHANNEL LOAD-BALANCE.
Okay, the default on this model is the same
as the access switches, source MAC address.
So let’s change it.
PORT-CHANNEL LOAD-BALANCE SRC-DST-IP.
And confirm once more.
DO SHOW ETHERCHANNEL LOAD-BALANCE.
Okay, it was changed.
Now I’ll hop back on to DSW2 and do the
same configuration.
PORT-CHANNEL LOAD-BALANCE SRC-DST-IP.
And then confirm.
DO SHOW ETHERHCHANNEL LOAD-BALANCE.
Looks good.
So, in today’s lab we configured Layer 2
and Layer 3 EtherChannels using LACP, PAgP,
and static EtherChannel.
We also configured the EtherChannel load-balancing
method to take use the source and destination
IP addresses to determine which interface
should be used, instead of the default which
was the source MAC address only.
That’s all for this lab.
Next let’s take a look at a lab in Boson
NetSim for CCNA.
Okay, for today's Boson NetSim lab preview,
we're doing this lab: Layer 2 EtherChannel.
There are 3 labs about EtherChannel in NetSim
for CCNA.
This one here, EtherChannel Negotiation Protocols:
LACP, Layer 2 EtherChannel, and Layer 3 EtherChannel.
Let's do Layer 2 EtherChannel.
Click on lab instructions, and this is the
diagram.
So, you can see there are many opportunities
to use EtherChannel in this network.
All of these switches have redundant links
connecting them.
These are the commands you need to know.
You do know all of these commands already,
except this one here: SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS.
I'll show you that in a minute.
And here are the tasks.
There are three main tasks.
Task 1, plan EtherChannel configurations,
with 10 steps.
Task 2, review initial configurations, with
12 steps.
And then task 3, verify configurations.
So, for this preview we'll just do task 1.
So, we won't actually do any configurations, we're
going to plan the EtherChannel configurations
that you implement in task 2.
So, this task involves planning Layer 2 EtherChannel
configurations.
You will be creating a port-channel between
DSW1 and DSW2 in this lab.
Step 1, determine the number of links that
can be configured as part of the port-channel
group between DSW1 and DSW2.
Okay so, looks like two links, 5 and 6.
Now, what are the actual interface IDs of
these interfaces?
Let's check.
So I will show you that SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS
command here on DSW1.
ENABLE.
SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS.
So, CDP is Cisco Discovery Protocol.
It's a Cisco proprietary protocol that is
used to gather information about connected
devices.
So, when I enter this command here on DSW1
we'll get some basic information about all
of these switches it's connected to.
There we go.
So, DSW2 is here.
And notice under Local Interface it shows
FastEthernet 5 and 6.
So, those are these two interfaces here.
And also here under Port ID, these are the
interface IDs on the neighboring device.
So, FastEthernet5 on DSW1 is connected to
FastEthernet5 on DSW2.
FastEthernet6 on DSW1 is connected to FastEthernet6
on DSW2.
Okay, so that's step 1.
Next, step 2.
Verify the line and protocol states of each
interface.
This is referring to those two end columns
in the SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF command.
SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
Here, Status and Protocol.
So, they are up and up, no problems.
Observe the trunk state of each port.
Okay, SHOW INTERFACES TRUNK.
So, FastEthernet5 and 6 are both 'desirable'.
They are using ISL.
Interesting, not dot1q.
But they are trunking.
Looks like all VLANs are allowed.
Default...only VLAN 1 exists by default.
And, yeah, looks generally default except
that ISL encapsulation.
Because it's desirable, it's using DTP, so
I guess the encapsulation was also automatically
negotiated to be ISL.
Let's check that out on DSW2 also.
SHOW INTERFACES TRUNK.
Same, it is also using ISL for FastEthernet5
and 6.
Okay, switchports configured to be a member
of a channel-group must be configured the
same way in order for the port-channel to
operate correctly.
Verify that the interfaces are configured
correctly.
Okay I'll go back to DSW1.
Let's just check SHOW RUNNING-CONFIG.
Okay, there is no configuration on FastEthernet5
and 6.
How about DSW2?
SHOW RUNNING-CONFIG.
Same here, so that should be no problem.
Okay, step 5, what command can you issue to
configure an interface to be a member of a
port-channel group?
That is this command, I'm not actually going
to configure it, but it's the CHANNEL-GROUP
command.
CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE, and then either active
or passive, for LACP, desirable or auto, for
PAgP, or on for static EtherChannel.
Okay, observe spanning-tree output for VLAN
1.
Okay, let's do that first on DSW1.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
I think only VLAN 1 exists, so we could just
do SHOW SPANNING-TREE, but let's filter it
anyway.
Oh, so DSW1 looks like it is the root port
(*bridge).
All interfaces have a designated role.
And it says that here, 'this bridge is the
root'.
How about DSW2?
Okay first, spanning-tree quiz.
Which of DSW2's ports will be the root port?
FastEthernet 5 or 6?
So, they both have the same root cost, 19,
they're both directly connected here with
a cost of 19.
The neighboring switch ID is the same, they're
both connected to DSW1.
So the last tie-breaker is the neighboring
switch's port ID, the lower port ID.
So that is FastEthernet5 here.
So, I think DSW2's FastEthernet5 should be
the root port.
Let's see if I am correct.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE VLAN 1.
And I was correct, there we go.
Okay, next, 7.
In this lab, how much bandwidth is available
through the two links between DSW1 and DSW2?
So, it's FastEthernet, so it should be 200
megabits per second.
SHOW INTERFACE F0/5, has here...that is 100,000
kilobits.
So that's 100 megabits.
And FastEthernet0/6 should be the same.
Yeah, 100,000 kilobits.
Okay, so when you combine those two together,
the virtual port-channel interface should
have a bandwidth of 200,000 kilobits, 200
megabytes, or megabits.
Okay, so that was step 7.
Step 8, why is the full amount of bandwidth
not available on the link between FastEthernet5
and 6?
Why is that?
Well, that's because FastEthernet6 is blocking
because of spanning-tree.
How does EtherChannel increase the amount
of available...the amount of available bandwidth
between DSW1 and DSW2?
Because it combines them to form a single
logical interface.
I just showed you that in the lecture video.
So, number 10, how many switchports can be
configured to be a member of a port-channel
group?
So, up to 8 can be active at any one time,
but if you use LACP actually 16 can be configured,
but only up to 8 will be active and then the
remaining, up to 8, will be standby ports,
ready to take over if one of the active ports
fails.
Okay, so there's task 1.
Just take a quick look at task 2, what kind
of things you do.
Determine the number of links that can be
configured as part of the port-channel group.
Here we go, configure the interfaces as members
of channel-group 1 using 'on' mode.
Verify that an active trunk link exists on
the port-channel 1 interface of DSW1 and DSW2.
Verify the correct amount of bandwidth.
As I said, 200 megabits per second is available
between DSW1 and DSW2.
And then finally, verify your EtherChannel
configuration.
So, if you ever have any trouble you can check
the lab solutions down here.
As you can see it is quite lengthy and detailed,
and gives quite a lot of good information.
It's another great study resource.
Even if you don't have any trouble, I recommend
reading through here after you finish the
lab.
Okay, and you can also grade the lab by clicking
up here.
Now, I of course didn't finish the lab, so
it says here: you missed one or more commands
in the lab.
But if you check the device configurations
it'll show you which commands you missed.
If you put in some extra commands that you
don't need they will be highlighted in blue.
And it grades the lab for you.
So, I think Boson NetSim for CCNA is a great
study resource.
It's got a huge catalogue of in-depth labs
to help you practice your skills and really
test your knowledge.
If you want to get a copy of Boson NetSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
Before closing out the video, I want to take
a minute to thank my JCNP-level channel members.
Thank you to funnydart, Joshua, Scott, Aleksa,
Hassan, Gerrard, tibi, Vikram, Joyce, Marek,
Samil, velvijaykum, C Mohd, Johan, Mark, Miguel,
Yousif, kone, Boson, Sidi, Magrathea, Devin,
Charlsetta, Lito, Yonatan, Mike, Aleksander,
and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
One of you is still displaying as 'channel
failed to load'.
If this is you, please let me know and I'll
see if YouTube can fix it.
Thank you once again for your support.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.